_drafts/deploys-becoming-boring-part-1.md, before:

---
layout: post
title:  "Deploys Becoming Boring - Part 1: In the Beginning"
date:   2014-09-22 23:11:07
tags: deployment process series
---

It wasn't always easy for us to promote our code. Releases were deadlocked and
our clients were not confident about they would work. This first part outlines
the status quo before we started to change our release process. This is our story
about how over the course of a few weeks we were able to go from a system with
little confidence to smooth regular updates that became downright boring.

{% include series/deploys-becoming-boring.html %}

In The Beginning
---------------------------------------

We started our project with large releases. This was not how we wanted it
to be but it was how things ended up. Promoting each release turned into a
serious event whenever the deployment window opened up. We had all the
ceremony, fear and pressure to make our dates that are cited as delivery
anti-patterns by the [Continuous Delivery][cd] book.

> ... quick hacks to get newly deployed production systems running
> weren't being driven by such immediate commericial imperatives, but rather by
> the more subtle pressure to release on the day that was planned. The problem
> here is that releases into production are big events. As long as this is true
> they will be surrounded with a lot of ceremony and nervousness.
>
> <cite>Page 20 of [Continuous Delivery][cd]
> by [Jez Humble][jez] and [Dave Farley][dave]
> </cite>

Our software worked as advertised but had intermitent issues for some clients.
This discouraged these clients from taking new
releases. This caused a catch-22 prevented us from releasing new version that
fixed the issues which made problems worst and meant issues went unsolved
longer. Other software used with our continued to change in ways that forced us
to create small forks in the code to add new functionality against the old
releases instead of
shipping an new fixed version. Needless to say these forks were not what we
wanted to do long term and were a stop gap for our clients.

Many problems centered on environment instability. Our favourites
were running out of disk space or IP addresses that would prevent the running
system from continuing to function. We had one big pool for every environment
and so any misbehaving environment takes resources from its neighbours. This was
particularly troublesome with our Dev, QA and Cert environments which receieved
updates sequentially and failing in one environment prevented progressing to
the next one. Our clients who cared the most about QA and Cert would be
impacted when Dev is running larger tests that take lots of resources.

TODO: Talk about other changes in the environments causing breakages

<p class="center-image">
	<img
		title="All the ducks in a row"
		alt="Our three main ecosystems, Dev to QA to CERT"
		src="/images/posts/Ecosystems.png" />
</p>

TODO: Siloed knowledge around who could deploy

We had competing goals with some of our clients. They needed stability
whereas we needed to introduce and validate new functionality. Our ability to
produce new tested software vastly out stripped the rate that it was being
consumed downstream. We had been behaving like we could deploy changes the
second they were done but this was not reality beyond the Dev environment.
We were a rocket strapped to a steam engine.

We wanted to do better. We wanted to break this deployment deadlock and
accelerate the rate at which we could release with confidence.

The Agreement
---------------------------------------

For months we had been operating a fairly sophisticated [Deployment Pipeline][pipeline]
that would validate each commit. This helped us feel confident that we could
ship more frequently with out sacrificing quality.

In order to speed up we realized that we first needed to slow down. Going as
fast as we could was no good if clients did not use our updates. Slowing down
would also mean investing more into stability, testing and validation for each
change made to improve feedback on each release. We then struck the following
agreement to improve the situation with our clients:

1. Regular Weekly Deployments
1. Documented Changes
1. More Testing

In the next installment we will explain how the story unfolds and what changed
to get better at releasing with confidence.

[jez]:      https://twitter.com/jezhumble
[dave]:     https://twitter.com/davefarley77
[cd]:       http://www.amazon.com/dp/B003YMNVC0/
[pipeline]: http://martinfowler.com/bliki/DeploymentPipeline.html

Commit message:

Paragraph for unfortunate side effects

_drafts/deploys-becoming-boring-part-1.md, after:

---
layout: post
title:  "Deploys Becoming Boring - Part 1: In the Beginning"
date:   2014-09-22 23:11:07
tags: deployment process series
---

It wasn't always easy for us to promote our code. Releases were deadlocked and
our clients were not confident about they would work. This first part outlines
the status quo before we started to change our release process. This is our story
about how over the course of a few weeks we were able to go from a system with
little confidence to smooth regular updates that became downright boring.

{% include series/deploys-becoming-boring.html %}

In The Beginning
---------------------------------------

We started our project with large releases. This was not how we wanted it
to be but it was how things ended up. Promoting each release turned into a
serious event whenever the deployment window opened up. We had all the
ceremony, fear and pressure to make our dates that are cited as delivery
anti-patterns by the [Continuous Delivery][cd] book.

> ... quick hacks to get newly deployed production systems running
> weren't being driven by such immediate commericial imperatives, but rather by
> the more subtle pressure to release on the day that was planned. The problem
> here is that releases into production are big events. As long as this is true
> they will be surrounded with a lot of ceremony and nervousness.
>
> <cite>Page 20 of [Continuous Delivery][cd]
> by [Jez Humble][jez] and [Dave Farley][dave]
> </cite>

Our software worked as advertised but had intermitent issues for some clients.
This discouraged these clients from taking new
releases. This caused a catch-22 prevented us from releasing new version that
fixed the issues which made problems worst and meant issues went unsolved
longer. Other software used with our continued to change in ways that forced us
to create small forks in the code to add new functionality against the old
releases instead of
shipping an new fixed version. Needless to say these forks were not what we
wanted to do long term and were a stop gap for our clients.

Many problems centered on environment instability. Our favourites
were running out of disk space or IP addresses that would prevent the running
system from continuing to function. We had one big set of hardware for every environment
and so any misbehaving environment would take resources from its neighbours. This was
particularly troublesome with our Dev, QA and Cert environments which receieved
updates sequentially and failing in one environment prevented progressing to
the next one. Our clients who cared the most about QA and Cert would be
impacted when Dev is running larger tests that take lots of resources.

<p class="center-image">
	<img
		title="All the ducks in a row"
		alt="Our three main ecosystems, Dev to QA to CERT"
		src="/images/posts/Ecosystems.png" />
</p>

Another unfortunate consequence of sharing infrastructure between environments
was normal changes could have unintended side effects. Dev, QA and CERT are
internal environments and do not have formal change management processes.
Reconfiguring a network in QA might break Dev. Routine cleanup could remove
important records for a neighbouring environment. These open changes further
reduced our stablity and reliability.

TODO: Siloed knowledge around who could deploy

We had competing goals with some of our clients. They needed stability
whereas we needed to introduce and validate new functionality. Our ability to
produce new tested software vastly out stripped the rate that it was being
consumed downstream. We had been behaving like we could deploy changes the
second they were done but this was not reality beyond the Dev environment.
We were a rocket strapped to a steam engine.

We wanted to do better. We wanted to break this deployment deadlock and
accelerate the rate at which we could release with confidence.

The Agreement
---------------------------------------

For months we had been operating a fairly sophisticated [Deployment Pipeline][pipeline]
that would validate each commit. This helped us feel confident that we could
ship more frequently with out sacrificing quality.

In order to speed up we realized that we first needed to slow down. Going as
fast as we could was no good if clients did not use our updates. Slowing down
would also mean investing more into stability, testing and validation for each
change made to improve feedback on each release. We then struck the following
agreement to improve the situation with our clients:

1. Regular Weekly Deployments
1. Documented Changes
1. More Testing

In the next installment we will explain how the story unfolds and what changed
to get better at releasing with confidence.

[jez]:      https://twitter.com/jezhumble
[dave]:     https://twitter.com/davefarley77
[cd]:       http://www.amazon.com/dp/B003YMNVC0/
[pipeline]: http://martinfowler.com/bliki/DeploymentPipeline.html
