_drafts/deploys-becoming-boring-part-2.md, before:

---
layout: post
title:  "Deploys Becoming Boring - Part 2: Iterating"
date:   2014-09-22 23:11:07
tags: deployment process series
---

In order to make our releases smooth what happened? What changes did we make and what
did we learn? This is the story about how releases changed over time and became
what they are today.

It wasn't always easy for us to promote our code. It took time and effort to
get there and a whole lot of iterating. This is our story about how over the
course of a few weeks we were able to go from a system with little confidence
to smooth regular updates that are downright boring.

{% include series/deploys-becoming-boring.html %}

Going Weekly
---------------------------------------

Our first order of business to adhere to [The Agreement](TODO#the-agreement)
was deploying weekly, rain or shine.

Deploying weekly was not smooth at first but soon became much better. We still had a lot
of habits from our early deployments which resulted in some bad behaviour. In
the first two updates we tried to cram more new functionality into the releases
at the last minute. This was a risky proposition given our track record and
client confidence but we wanted to get more shipped! This resulted in back to
back [brown paper bag][bag] releases that need to be patched right away.
Luckily these issues we caught by our smoke tests and thanks to the existing
deployment pipelines were reproduced and fixed immediately.

From these initial hiccups we started to catch our stride. We spent more time
fixing defects and stabilizing the system. As we got into a rhythm the releases
became less important as we could easily wait for the next one and so the old
habits and stress of big releases faded. By the third deployment we had
polished the promotion process so that is was a single click for each service.
As things became easier we started to rotate the team members doing the
updates to share the knowledge more widely and further refine our efforts.

We decided to up the ante by doing Continuous Deployment in our Dev
environment. When releases passed sufficient testing they were automatically
deployed and the necessary high fives performed! Each commit would kick off
this cycle and so new deployments happened all of the time during active
development. There was so little overhead to each release that we barely
noticed that they were happening except for flashing colours on our dashboard.
This pressured us to automate even more of the feedback process so that no
human intervention was required.

Manual deployments quickly became a thing of the past. We extended our scripts
used in the Dev environment to deploy to any other environment. This simplified
the process and made it easy enough for more people perform updates.
We problems were found they would be fixed immediately which helped make them
more robust and resilient. By continuously exercising these scripts we became
very confident they would work as intended. No longer was it a process that
could only be done by the original contributors but something anyone on the
team could do.


Testing
---------------------------------------

Next step to satisfy [The Agreement](TODO#the-agreement) was to tighten up our quality
assurance and testing practices.

A very simple change that we began immediately was performing more comprehensive
smoke testing. We verified that entire system could perform the most critical
operations. This was done with our clients to share the new releases with them
and collaborate more. This was primarily manual in later environments with some
automation per service.

In our Dev environment we bolstered our testing with more scenarios that
covered the use cases that our clients cared about the most. This started as
manual acceptance testing near the end of each release that was time consuming
and onerous. Week by week we automated this process so that it was no longer a
final stamp on each release but was triggered by every commit as part of the
deployment pipeline to act as release acceptance tests. Once fully automated,
we could be very confident in each change that was being made to the system
and validate new releases faster than ever.

The testing forms two levels, the individual services then fully integrated.

First commit tests run to verify the basic functionality at the lowest level.
These are not all unit tests so that we could verify the most important parts
of each component as early as possible. Next we typically deploy that service
in isolation, execute smoke tests and then run acceptance tests. These tests
are more complicated and cover larger portions of the system. They still try to
isolate each service but can include other stable collaborators as needed.

<p class="center-image">
	<img
		title="One little service building in a row."
		alt="A single pipeline with a commit state, acceptance stage and finally a deploy"
		src="/images/posts/SimplePipeline.png" />
</p>

We then update the changed service(s) followed by running the release acceptance
tests to comprehensively verify the new changes. Where possible we try to keep
the other services unchanged so failures can be attributed to the changes.
This has been instrumental at finding subtle system level integration issues.
Occasionally, we would perform some manual testing for areas particularly hard
to check automatically or would provide limited use. We try very hard to
automate all of our testing and reduce what needs to be verified manually.

<p class="center-image">
	<img
		title="Three little service building in a row."
		alt="A three pipelines then integrated testing followed up by shipping!!"
		src="/images/posts/PipelineFunnel.png" />
</p>

Commits trigger the individual deployment pipelines which are responsible for
the commit and acceptance tests. Once each pipeline is complete they trigger
the release acceptance tests. This exercises all changes early and often so that
we receive feedback right away.

We also started running the release acceptance tests periodically to test the
environment. By exercising the entire system regularly at a working state we
isolated environmental issues before they caused other problems. Finding
infrastructure issues right away helped with finding the root cause and learning
what changes were harmful.

Another quality improvement was mandatory code reviews. To maximize learning we
would include an expert on the code being modified and someone less familiar
with it. Passively knowledge flowed from expert to the unfamiliar raising the
team's ability to contribute across the entire codebase. These reviews were not
intended to act as a replacement for other testing but instead a sober second
thought and often a fresh pair of eyes to help review automated test cases.

Managing the Changes
---------------------------------------

Next step to satisfy [The Agreement](TODO#the-agreement) was to tighten up our quality
assurance and testing practices.

Change management began to take form around our regular updates. At first we
stuck to a strict weekly scheduled but relax the process with more confidence.
We started collaboratively deciding when new versions should be deployed.
Previously there was lots of ceremony and negotiating to decide when we could
deploy new versions. The weekly schedule provided a reliable time frame and
easier to accommodate short delays or adjustments. The confidence then improved
our collaboration which let us work through conflicting changes before they
became a problem.

Each release started to include release notes and more documentation. Handoffs
typically involved detailed instructions regarding how each part worked within
the larger system. This took effort and time from improving the system and we
did not think these documents were overly helpful. More automation meant we
could elminate documentation for how to perform these steps. The smaller and
smaller releases helped us decrease what was being documented and highlighting
just what had changed.

Our biggest break through came when we moved this change log into the project's
repository. While this might seem like a small thing it made a very big
difference. Developers no longer had to break their flow to maintain
documentation and they could include updated documents within pull requests.
This was a simple markdown file within the repository and lined up to version
numbers which were also set within the repo. It was now our responsibility to
keep these documents up to date which helped reinforce getting it done.

TODO: SEMVER
TODO: Clean up this section
TODO: Release documentation

The Effects of Speed
---------------------------------------

While not strictly caused by [The Agreement](TODO#the-agreement) strange things
started happenning with our more frequent deployments.

Each new issue that came up was dealt with immediately and then more permanent
fixes were put into place to prevent them from occurring again. This included
more monitoring and diagnostics which enabled us to find and deal with issues
before they hindered the services we had created. We invested further into
hardening our environments and isolating the different resources used by each
one. This prevented the cross contamination we were seeing and vastly improved
the environment stability. Thanks to weekly releases our clients would get the
changes right away instead of having to wait weeks for fixes to be deployed.

Another interesting side effect occurred as we continued this process. Early on
the changes were quite large but eventually shrunk much smaller. The accelerated
releases meant that we could no longer do large sweeping changes to the system
and instead needed to think about how they could be introduced incrementally.
By having small changes it was easier to get the quick feedback we wanted while
keeping the entire system stable. Smaller incremental changes continued to
improve the quality of our releases.

Such frequent releases meant that releases were always on our mind. Every
change we introduced needed to consider how it would impact the deployment
and our users. Backwards compatibility became a very important design
consideration and needed extra testing/development effort. Although more work
was required to keep the code stable we were able to ship new functionality
sooner and with less ceremony. Earlier delivery meant better feedback on new
features which helped guide future changes. Breaking changes took more time and
often spanned multiple releases so there was always a smooth transition. This
tradeoff was routinely frustrating but we persisted because it helped us make a
better product and allowed our users adopt new releases sooner.

Conclusions
---------------------------------------

We were now able to consistently add new functionality and improve the
capabilities of the system safely. We started building things smaller, more
backwards compatible and our quality went up. By investing in changes to
stabilize the system we were able to radically improve how we ship software.

[cd]:       http://www.amazon.com/dp/B003YMNVC0/
[pipeline]: http://martinfowler.com/bliki/DeploymentPipeline.html
[bag]:      http://www.catb.org/jargon/html/B/brown-paper-bag-bug.html

Commit message:

Cleaning up the conclusion and talking about semantic versionning

_drafts/deploys-becoming-boring-part-2.md, after:

---
layout: post
title:  "Deploys Becoming Boring - Part 2: Iterating"
date:   2014-09-22 23:11:07
tags: deployment process series
---

In order to make our releases smooth what happened? What changes did we make and what
did we learn? This is the story about how releases changed over time and became
what they are today.

It wasn't always easy for us to promote our code. It took time and effort to
get there and a whole lot of iterating. This is our story about how over the
course of a few weeks we were able to go from a system with little confidence
to smooth regular updates that are downright boring.

{% include series/deploys-becoming-boring.html %}

Going Weekly
---------------------------------------

Our first order of business to adhere to [The Agreement](TODO#the-agreement)
was deploying weekly, rain or shine.

Deploying weekly was not smooth at first but soon became much better. We still had a lot
of habits from our early deployments which resulted in some bad behaviour. In
the first two updates we tried to cram more new functionality into the releases
at the last minute. This was a risky proposition given our track record and
client confidence but we wanted to get more shipped! This resulted in back to
back [brown paper bag][bag] releases that need to be patched right away.
Luckily these issues we caught by our smoke tests and thanks to the existing
deployment pipelines were reproduced and fixed immediately.

From these initial hiccups we started to catch our stride. We spent more time
fixing defects and stabilizing the system. As we got into a rhythm the releases
became less important as we could easily wait for the next one and so the old
habits and stress of big releases faded. By the third deployment we had
polished the promotion process so that is was a single click for each service.
As things became easier we started to rotate the team members doing the
updates to share the knowledge more widely and further refine our efforts.

We decided to up the ante by doing Continuous Deployment in our Dev
environment. When releases passed sufficient testing they were automatically
deployed and the necessary high fives performed! Each commit would kick off
this cycle and so new deployments happened all of the time during active
development. There was so little overhead to each release that we barely
noticed that they were happening except for flashing colours on our dashboard.
This pressured us to automate even more of the feedback process so that no
human intervention was required.

Manual deployments quickly became a thing of the past. We extended our scripts
used in the Dev environment to deploy to any other environment. This simplified
the process and made it easy enough for more people perform updates.
We problems were found they would be fixed immediately which helped make them
more robust and resilient. By continuously exercising these scripts we became
very confident they would work as intended. No longer was it a process that
could only be done by the original contributors but something anyone on the
team could do.


Testing
---------------------------------------

Next step to satisfy [The Agreement](TODO#the-agreement) was to tighten up our quality
assurance and testing practices.

A very simple change that we began immediately was performing more comprehensive
smoke testing. We verified that entire system could perform the most critical
operations. This was done with our clients to share the new releases with them
and collaborate more. This was primarily manual in later environments with some
automation per service.

In our Dev environment we bolstered our testing with more scenarios that
covered the use cases that our clients cared about the most. This started as
manual acceptance testing near the end of each release that was time consuming
and onerous. Week by week we automated this process so that it was no longer a
final stamp on each release but was triggered by every commit as part of the
deployment pipeline to act as release acceptance tests. Once fully automated,
we could be very confident in each change that was being made to the system
and validate new releases faster than ever.

The testing forms two levels, the individual services then fully integrated.

First commit tests run to verify the basic functionality at the lowest level.
These are not all unit tests so that we could verify the most important parts
of each component as early as possible. Next we typically deploy that service
in isolation, execute smoke tests and then run acceptance tests. These tests
are more complicated and cover larger portions of the system. They still try to
isolate each service but can include other stable collaborators as needed.

<p class="center-image">
	<img
		title="One little service building in a row."
		alt="A single pipeline with a commit state, acceptance stage and finally a deploy"
		src="/images/posts/SimplePipeline.png" />
</p>

We then update the changed service(s) followed by running the release acceptance
tests to comprehensively verify the new changes. Where possible we try to keep
the other services unchanged so failures can be attributed to the changes.
This has been instrumental at finding subtle system level integration issues.
Occasionally, we would perform some manual testing for areas particularly hard
to check automatically or would provide limited use. We try very hard to
automate all of our testing and reduce what needs to be verified manually.

<p class="center-image">
	<img
		title="Three little service building in a row."
		alt="A three pipelines then integrated testing followed up by shipping!!"
		src="/images/posts/PipelineFunnel.png" />
</p>

Commits trigger the individual deployment pipelines which are responsible for
the commit and acceptance tests. Once each pipeline is complete they trigger
the release acceptance tests. This exercises all changes early and often so that
we receive feedback right away.

We also started running the release acceptance tests periodically to test the
environment. By exercising the entire system regularly at a working state we
isolated environmental issues before they caused other problems. Finding
infrastructure issues right away helped with finding the root cause and learning
what changes were harmful.

Another quality improvement was mandatory code reviews. To maximize learning we
would include an expert on the code being modified and someone less familiar
with it. Passively knowledge flowed from expert to the unfamiliar raising the
team's ability to contribute across the entire codebase. These reviews were not
intended to act as a replacement for other testing but instead a sober second
thought and often a fresh pair of eyes to help review automated test cases.

Managing the Changes
---------------------------------------

Next step to satisfy [The Agreement](TODO#the-agreement) was to tighten up our quality
assurance and testing practices.

Change management began to take form around our regular updates. At first we
stuck to a strict weekly scheduled but relax the process with more confidence.
We started collaboratively deciding when new versions should be deployed.
Previously there was lots of ceremony and negotiating to decide when we could
deploy new versions. The weekly schedule provided a reliable time frame and
easier to accommodate short delays or adjustments. The confidence then improved
our collaboration which let us work through conflicting changes before they
became a problem.

Each release started to include release notes and more documentation. Handoffs
typically involved detailed instructions regarding how each part worked within
the larger system. This took effort and time from improving the system and we
did not think these documents were overly helpful. More automation meant we
could elminate documentation for how to perform these steps. The smaller and
smaller releases helped us decrease what was being documented and highlighting
just what had changed.

Our biggest break through came when we moved this change log into the project's
repository. While this might seem like a small thing it made a very big
difference. Developers no longer had to break their flow to maintain
documentation and they could include updated documents within pull requests.
This was a simple markdown file within the repository and lined up to version
numbers which were also set within the repo. It was now our responsibility to
keep these documents up to date which helped reinforce getting it done.

To clearly show the scope of changes with each release we started to adopt
[semantic versioning][semver]. I would highly recommend reading the article as
this versionning scheme is a great stratedgy for managing API's and their
compatibility. Of all the changes we made this felt hit or miss. It started as
extra work near the end of a release to bump all version numbers. We then
standardized so that all repos declare their own version as used during builds.
As developers would make their changes they could then adjust the version based
on the scope of the changes. Some projects unfortunately went to 1.0.0 too soon
and have been incremented much faster due to subsequent breaking changes. We
had been trying to keep our projects small which has led to interesting
relationships between projects that sometimes will cascade. Overall it helps
keep our releases clear and is an area for future discussions.

The Effects of Speed
---------------------------------------

While not strictly caused by [The Agreement](TODO#the-agreement) strange things
started happenning with our more frequent deployments.

Each new issue that came up was dealt with immediately and then more permanent
fixes were put into place to prevent them from occurring again. This included
more monitoring and diagnostics which enabled us to find and deal with issues
before they hindered the services we had created. We invested further into
hardening our environments and isolating the different resources used by each
one. This prevented the cross contamination we were seeing and vastly improved
the environment stability. Thanks to weekly releases our clients would get the
changes right away instead of having to wait weeks for fixes to be deployed.

Another interesting side effect occurred as we continued this process. Early on
the changes were quite large but eventually shrunk much smaller. The accelerated
releases meant that we could no longer do large sweeping changes to the system
and instead needed to think about how they could be introduced incrementally.
By having small changes it was easier to get the quick feedback we wanted while
keeping the entire system stable. Smaller incremental changes continued to
improve the quality of our releases.

Such frequent releases meant that releases were always on our mind. Every
change we introduced needed to consider how it would impact the deployment
and our users. Backwards compatibility became a very important design
consideration and needed extra testing/development effort. Although more work
was required to keep the code stable we were able to ship new functionality
sooner and with less ceremony. Earlier delivery meant better feedback on new
features which helped guide future changes. Breaking changes took more time and
often spanned multiple releases so there was always a smooth transition. This
tradeoff was routinely frustrating but we persisted because it helped us make a
better product and allowed our users adopt new releases sooner.

Conclusions
---------------------------------------

We are now able to consistently add new functionality and improve the
capabilities of the system safely. We started building things smaller, with
better backwards compatiblity and with more thorough testing resulting in
smoother updates and improved quality. By stabilizing our releases we were able
to radically improve. For us and our clients the difference is dramatic.

This isn't the end; we are still working at improving. In the next part of this
series I will recap the shifts we have seen and share where we want to go next.

[cd]:       http://www.amazon.com/dp/B003YMNVC0/
[pipeline]: http://martinfowler.com/bliki/DeploymentPipeline.html
[bag]:      http://www.catb.org/jargon/html/B/brown-paper-bag-bug.html
[semver]:   http://semver.org/
